# On absolute truth

Absolute truths are misaligning the human in drawing attention outside the humans actual condition, thus reducing the human's pragmatic interaction within the self-evident reality, in favour of an assumed inverifiable reality that yields no pragmatic conseuqences of benefit. Only by convincing others of the same absolute truth, can the claimed absolute truth be used as a pragmatic device to steer the pragmatic behaviour of others, as in "you must do so and so, because the non-verifiable absolute truth told so". This ontology thus is relational realism: the truth that makes a difference to human reality. However, what prevents exploitative behaviour if self-interest and brute power struggle is the axis of choice rather than absolute moral values? A society produces moral values as negotiations based in the common self-interest of individuals, like "we all want safety, lets make it a moral code to not exercise violence under so and so condition". The individual balances in investing in shared moral codes and investing in self-interest. When investing in self-interest gives greater benefit (for example somehow go undetected and avoiding social stigma), people rather invest in self-interest. Moral codes are not absolute values to the individual, but always negotiated against conditions and self-interest. This is evident when a believer in so or so religion makes an exception from the conceptualized value system, simply because "it is necessary in this given case". Self-interest is not universally agreed on, but is against the backdrop of what the person values, where nature itself deceives people of their expected reward, in a long term intricate web of consequences as chess-moves against the self-interested human being. Fantastic morals and pragmatic (verifiable, consequent regardless assumption) morals are two categories by which we can discern types of morals. Fantastic moral (fantasy, assumed) is such that "unconditional generousity is rewarded by God", but pragmatic moral is the recognition of peoples self-interest, and negotiating with them. Simply: we do not need absolute truth for anything, other than, perhaps a shortcut, a rule of thumb, for times when analytical rigor for some reason is not feasible. The fantastic morals, however, must be seen as a prior, less evolved step of humanity. There are two cases of relating to fantastic absolute trut: the unknowing and the deceptive: The unknowing will have a fantastic absolute truth as compass for navigating life while not aware of the actual chain of consequences of pragmatism. The deceptive case is to optimize for pragmatic actions while and claim to adhere to fantastic absolute truth. In the first case, the fantastic absolute truth is deceiving the individual alone (and perhaps a few others inspired by him or her), in the second case, the person knows the fantastic absolute truth to be an effective device in subjecting others to its deception for sake of benefit of the deceiver. It is deceptive in that it operates pragmatically under the surface of its claims, hiding reality behind a fantasy. The best is to make pragmatic claims and act pragmatically. That is to align ones actions with trut; truth in the sense of what applies, and claim that one values what one enacts. Why specifically is it suboptimal to claim fantastic absolute truth while acting pragmatically. Why would it be better to enact pragmatically and recognize that and claim that to be the truth one knows? If self-interest is at the core, and the deception of absolute truth is a device utilized to deceive others and benefit from it, why wouldn't that be justified over instead negotiating pragmatic morals with others? Why compromise when you can get it all? Because, at the core of negotiated values is honesty, which is a negotiated moral agreed to be enacted on, for the sake of all's self-interest. The emergent benefit of cooperation is greater to all individuals and to each individual, long term, than the prospect for one individual of even greater benefit if dominating by self-interest. The society agreeing on the core of honesty, also actively seek out those who betray that value, in order to disadvantage them, to deter them. Why then is there dictatorial states with elites exercising great self-interest. Because those groups of elites are micro-societies within a society, where they have agreed on a shared set of values to benefit each other. The same structure of cost-benefit and negotiation of self-interest is replicated in any cohisive group, just that in those societies, it fails to scale.
